

Introduction to Unsupervised Learning
- Definition: Unsupervised learning algorithms find patterns in data without using labeled outcomes.
- Key Focus:
  -Clustering: Finding groups or clusters in data.
  - Dimensionality Reduction: Reducing the number of features while preserving essential information.
- Objectives:
  - Implement clustering algorithms.
  - Apply dimensionality reduction techniques.
  - Visualize and compare results.

---

Concept:

K-Means Clustering iteratively assigns data points to the nearest cluster centroid and updates the centroids based on the mean of points assigned to them.
The objective is to minimize the sum of squared distances between data points and their respective cluster centroids.
Visualization:

Elbow Method Plot:

Although you are focusing on Silhouette Score, including the Elbow Method plot is often useful for understanding how to choose the initial range of clusters.
Show the "Elbow" point, where the within-cluster sum of squares (WCSS) starts decreasing at a slower rate.
Silhouette Score Plot:

Plot the Silhouette Score for different numbers of clusters to identify the optimal number.
Higher average Silhouette Scores indicate a better-defined clustering structure.

---

Hierarchical Clustering
Concept:
Builds a tree (dendrogram) of clusters either through agglomerative (bottom-up) or divisive (top-down) methods.
Visualization:
Include a dendrogram to visualize how clusters are merged step-by-step.
Add a scatter plot of the final clusters.
Code Snippet:
python
from scipy.cluster.hierarchy import dendrogram, linkage
Z = linkage(X, 'ward')
dendrogram(Z)
Key Insight: Hierarchical clustering is useful for visualizing data structure but is computationally expensive for large datasets.



DBSCAN (Density-Based Clustering)
Concept:
Groups points that are closely packed, marking points in low-density areas as noise.
Requires two parameters: eps (distance threshold) and min_samples (minimum points required to form a cluster).

Visualization:
Include a scatter plot showing clusters and outliers.

Code Snippet:
python
from sklearn.cluster import DBSCAN
dbscan = DBSCAN(eps=0.5, min_samples=5)
y_dbscan = dbscan.fit_predict(X)
Comparison with K-Means:
DBSCAN handles noise and varying densities well, unlike K-Means.


Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
Concept:
PCA reduces the dimensionality by finding the directions (principal components) that maximize variance.

Visualization:
Include a scree plot showing the explained variance by each principal component.
Add a 2D scatter plot visualizing data projected onto the first two principal components.

Code Snippet:
python
pca = PCA(n_components=2)
X_pca = pca.fit_transform(X)
Key Insight: PCA is useful for reducing dimensionality in datasets with linear relationships but may lose information.

t-SNE
Concept:
t-SNE focuses on preserving local similarities between data points.
Ideal for high-dimensional data with complex, non-linear patterns.

Visualization:
Add a 2D scatter plot showing the t-SNE projection.
Code Snippet:
python
tsne = TSNE(n_components=2, perplexity=30, n_iter=1000)
X_tsne = tsne.fit_transform(X)
Key Insight: t-SNE excels in visualizing clusters but does not preserve global structure.

Comparing PCA and t-SNE
Visualization:
Side-by-side visualizations of PCA and t-SNE projections of the same dataset.
Comparison:
PCA: Fast, preserves global structure, works well with linear relationships.
t-SNE: Better for visualizing clusters in non-linear data but more computationally intensive.
Key Insight: Choose PCA for preprocessing and dimensionality reduction for modeling, and t-SNE for visualizing high-dimensional clusters.


Summary of Findings
Clustering Algorithms:
K-Means: Efficient but struggles with varying densities.
Hierarchical: Visualizes data structure but computationally expensive.
DBSCAN: Excellent for noisy data and clusters of varying shapes.
Dimensionality Reduction:
PCA: Suitable for linear patterns and fast, but global structure might overshadow local clusters.
t-SNE: Ideal for discovering complex clusters, though slower and sensitive to parameters.
Slide 10: Code Implementation
Showcase snippets of the key parts of code used for clustering and dimensionality reduction.
Provide any insights into how to optimize or improve the performance of these algorithms (e.g., adjusting parameters for t-SNE or DBSCAN).
